title: "A High Level Code Walk Through Ruby MRI"
date: 2012/12/3
tag: Ruby

<div style="float: left; padding: 17px 30px 10px 0px">
  <table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" border="0">
    <tr><td align="center"><img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2012/12/3/screencast.png"></td></tr>
    <tr><td align="center"><i><a href="http://www.rubyinside.com/ruby-mri-code-walk-tour-6020.html">Watch it now on rubyinside.com!</a></i></td></tr>
  </table>
</div>

Have you ever thought about taking at look at Ruby’s internal C source code,
but weren’t quite sure where to get started? Well, this weekend [Peter Cooper](http://peterc.org)
and I recorded a screencast that is just for you. We went on a tour through the
MRI source code tree, and recorded it in a 33 minute screencast called: [A High
Level Code Walk Through Ruby
MRI](http://www.rubyinside.com/ruby-mri-code-walk-tour-6020.html). We’ll give
you a “lay of the land,” a sense of what is where inside the MRI C source code
tree and suggest places to get started reading the C source code yourself.

Special thanks to Peter for taking time out of his busy schedule to record and
edit the video, and for being such a big fan of my book, [Ruby Under a
Microscope](http://patshaughnessy.net/ruby-under-a-microscope)! I’m sure you
all know Peter as the editor of [Ruby Inside](http://www.rubyinside.com) and
[Ruby Weekly](http://rubyweekly.com), but he’s also recorded a number of great
screencasts. Just this June he produced the fantastic [Ruby 1.9
Walkthrough](https://cooperpress.com/19walkthrough), and earlier in February he
did the fun [Ruby Trick Shots](http://rubyreloaded.com/trickshots/) piece. In
fact, Peter’s new Kickstarter project, [The Ruby 2.0
Walkthrough](http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1225193080/the-ruby-20-walkthrough),
was backed just last week - keep an eye out for that in the coming months!
This is the first screencast I’ve ever done; having the chance to do it with
Peter was a bit like stepping onto a tennis court for the first time and
getting a private lesson from John McEnroe - or maybe Andy Murray would be a
better analogy.

Let us know if you like this; if enough people are interested we may do some
more screencasts on Ruby internals, diving into more detail that we had time
for this week. Enjoy!

