title: "An Interview With Jim Weirich"
date: 2012/12/13
tag: Interviews

This appeared [on
RubySource.com](http://www.sitepoint.com/an-interview-with-jim-weirich/) last
week; just getting around to posting a link to the interview here also....

<p></p>

<div style="float: left; padding: 7px 30px 10px 0px">
<table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" border="0">
  <tr><td><img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2012/12/13/jim.jpg"></td></tr>
  <tr><td align="center"><small><i>Jim Weirich is the Chief Scientist at <a href="http://neo.com">Neo</a></i></small></td></tr>
</table>
</div>

I’ve been familiar with Jim Weirich’s name for a while; among other things he
wrote the “rake” tool which most of us use on a daily basis. Then I was lucky
enough to see Jim do [a presentation at GoRuCo this
June](http://www.confreaks.com/videos/988-goruco2012-power-rake), when he
explained some of the more advanced features of rake. I was immediately struck
by how Jim was able to explain a very complex topic in a natural,
straightforward way. Later this Fall at RubyConf I saw Jim gave [an amazing
keynote
address](http://www.confreaks.com/videos/1287-rubyconf2012-y-not-adventures-in-functional-programming)
that derived the Y-Combinator from first principles, explaining some of the
basic ideas behind Lambda Calculus along the way. This time he not only clearly
explained an even more difficult topic, but was able to make what would
normally be a dry, mathematical subject very entertaining.

This month I was thrilled had the chance to interview Jim for RubySource; it
was a great opportunity for me to learn more about him and how he approaches
public speaking. We also had a chance to talk about how he got started as a
computer programmer, why he learned Ruby, functional programming, Ruby’s
threading model and also his new
[RSpec-Given](https://github.com/jimweirich/rspec-given) framework. I’ve typed
in the interesting parts of our conversation and [posted them on RubySource.com](http://www.sitepoint.com/an-interview-with-jim-weirich).
