title: "My eBook build process and some PDF, EPUB and MOBI tips"
date: 2012/11/27

<div style="float: left; padding: 17px 30px 10px 0px">
  <table cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" border="0">
    <tr><td align="center"><img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2012/11/27/cover-ana.png"></td></tr>
    <tr><td align="center"><i><a href="http://patshaughnessy.net/ruby-under-a-microscope">Ruby Under a Microscope</a> is an illustrated guide to<br/> Ruby internals. No C programming required!</i></td></tr>
  </table>
</div>

In case you missed it, last month I self-published an eBook about Ruby
internals called [Ruby Under a
Microscope](http://patshaughnessy.net/ruby-under-a-microscope). To date I’ve
sold over 600 copies - thanks everyone! I’ve never written anything so
ambitious before, and I’m grateful for your support. I hope it’s been a fun
read, and that you come away with a better appreciation for the amazing work
Matz and the rest of the core team have done to create such a beautiful
language. It was certainly a lot of fun to write!

In the spirit of “sharing is caring,” and to follow in the footsteps of some
Ruby self-publishers like Jesse Storimer (see [4 Months of ebook
Sales](http://jstorimer.com/2012/04/20/4-months-of-ebook-sales.html) and
[Lessons Learned Getting Other People to Sell My
Ebook](http://jstorimer.com/2012/10/15/getting-others-to-sell-my-ebook.html))
and Avdi Grimm (see [My authoring
tools](http://devblog.avdi.org/2012/01/12/my-authoring-tools/)) who have been
generous with their knowledge, I’d like to try to pass along whatever
information I can about how to publish an eBook. This post contains a high
level description of my build process for [Ruby Under a Microscope](http://patshaughnessy.net/ruby-under-a-microscope), and also a
few tips for dealing with the PDF, EPUB and MOBI file formats that I learned
along the way. If anyone would like actual code or more technical detail about
my build process, or if there’s any other way I can help you self-publish
something, please let me know!

## My authoring tools

To write [Ruby Under a
Microscope](http://patshaughnessy.net/ruby-under-a-microscope) I used Apple
Pages on a Mac laptop. While I love VIM for writing code, I find it easier and
more natural to use a traditional word processor to write English text. Also,
Apple’s spelling autocorrect feature works nicely; I prefer to use the
“Automatically use spell checker suggestions” option in Preferences -&gt;
Auto-Correction.

As you might know, [Ruby Under a
Microscope](http://patshaughnessy.net/ruby-under-a-microscope) contains a large
number of diagrams - a picture is worth 1000 words, and often I find visual
aids are the only way to communicate the complex ideas, algorithms and data
structures Ruby uses internally. To draw these I used the
[Omnigraffle](http://www.omnigroup.com/products/omnigraffle/) product from The
Omni Group. This is an amazing tool that allows you to produce professional
looking diagrams very quickly. It also integrates very nicely with Apple Pages;
I can copy/paste a diagram from Omnigraffle right into Pages and immediately
see something that will closely resemble my final document. As I’ll explain
below, I also ended up purchasing a license for Omnigraffle Pro, in order to be
able to export my diagrams as SVG vector image files, a feature the standard
version does not contain.

## The Bookshop gem

Once I had the bulk of my writing done, I copied my text into a series of
HTML/ERB files and used a gem called
[Bookshop](https://github.com/blueheadpublishing/bookshop/) to manage the
process of creating the PDF, EPUB and MOBI target files from them. Bookshop, in
turn, uses a tool called [PrinceXML](http://www.princexml.com) to create the
PDF file:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2012/11/27/pdf-build.png"/>

As you can see, Bookshop is essentially a Ruby static site generator like
[Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com) or [Middleman](http://middlemanapp.com): you use
it to run a series of ERB transformations that produce static HTML and CSS.
Then Bookshop launches PrinceXML to convert the HTML to PDF. PrinceXML is not
cheap ($495 US), but has been worth every penny to me. It does a remarkable job
rendering the PDF, allowing you to use really any CSS styling/design code you
you would like to. With PrinceXML, creating a beautiful PDF file is as simple
as - or as hard as - creating a beautiful web site.

PrinceXML also supports a number of print-only related CSS directives you may
not be familiar from web development, such as the “page-break-before” attribute
or the @page directive. For example, I used this CSS code to indicate I wanted
page numbers in the lower left corner for left side pages:

<pre type="css">
@page :left {
  @bottom-left {
    font: 8pt "Helvetica Neue", serif;
    content: counter(page);
    padding-top: 2em;
    vertical-align: top;
    color: #880000;
  }
}
</pre>

One of the nicest features of Bookshop was that out of the box it provided a
series of CSS templates to get me started, containing a series of example CSS
styles I could use for page numbers, the table of contents and more.

Next, here’s how Bookshop creates the EPUB file:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2012/11/27/epub-build.png"/>

You can see here that the EPUB is essentially a ZIP file containing the static
HTML/CSS source code, along with a few mysterious XML files (content.opf,
toc.ncx, etc.) that contain the book’s table of contents, a list of your HTML
and other source codes files with their mime types, and other meta data.
Bookshop also automatically runs the
[EpubCheck](http://code.google.com/p/epubcheck/ ) utility on the finished EPUB
file to help you be sure you got everything correct in those XML files.

If you’re really interested in learning the details of the EPUB format, this
fun, practical video by Paul Salvette might be worth watching:
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RSc7XZzMkq0](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RSc7XZzMkq0)

Finally, Bookshop launches Amazon’s [KindleGen
utility](http://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.html?ie=UTF8&docId=1000765211) to
generate the MOBI file from the EPUB file:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2012/11/27/mobi-build.png"/>

## Customizing Bookshop

To make my life easier, I ended up customizing Bookshop to support code syntax
highlighting (using [Coderay](http://coderay.rubychan.de)) and to allow Markdown as the source file format
(using [Redcarpet](https://github.com/vmg/redcarpet)). I also customized it to
be able to manage the large number of diagram images files I created in special
ways. If anyone is interested in these details, let me know. In a nutshell, I
used SVG to represent the diagrams for the PDF, but PNG for the diagrams in the
EPUB/MOBI files; using two different file formats for the same images required
some code changes to Bookshop.

I’ve also heard good things about the
[Kitabu](https://github.com/fnando/kitabu) gem, which seems to function in
largely the same way as Bookshop. I haven’t tried it, but if I write another
eBook I’ll probably look at using Kitabu instead, since it already contains
support for code syntax highlighting and Markdown. It’s also encouraging that
Jesse Storimer, a prolific eBook author, is a maintainer on that project.

## PDF tip: use vector image file formats

PDF is the the Mercedes of eBook file formats. I’m guessing most people who
read technical eBooks use a PDF file on a laptop: it just works, it looks the
same on every platform, and we all have the confidence that the rendered
document will appear the same as the original document did. After spending
months crafting a PDF file, I’m amazed at what Adobe’s software can do - why
read a book using any other file format?

One important but easily overlooked property of the PDF file format is that it
is vector based. That means that, like SVG and related image file formats, all
of the text and other rendering information in a PDF document is saved as a
series of vector commands: “go here, draw this, move there, draw that, etc.”
But since the Adobe’s PDF file format is more or less a black box, this doesn’t
normally matter: who cares how the PDF file format works internally?

I certainly didn’t, until I tried to render some of the many diagrams in [Ruby
Under a Microscope](http://patshaughnessy.net/ruby-under-a-microscope) in a PDF
file. For my first attempt, I rendered my diagrams as PNG images and then
included them in my HTML using &lt;img&gt; tags, as I normally do for blog posts.
PrinceXML then produced a PDF file that looked like this:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2012/11/27/blurry-text.png"/>

While this isn’t horrible, you can see the “YARV internal stack,”
“rb_control_frame_t” and other text in my diagram at the bottom is blurry and
somewhat disappointing to look at. The text above, which originally came from
the HTML source code of my book, looks fine. It almost looks as if you were
viewing the diagram through a thick piece of glass, while viewing the rest of
the document directly with the naked eye.

The problem here is that the end user PDF viewer software, for me Apple’s
Preview app, has to resize the original PNG image for the diagram, scaling the
text as necessary along the way. This produces the blurriness. It’s also
possible the scaling is performed by PrinceXML when the PDF file is generated.

It took me a few days of research, trial and error to stumble upon the
solution: since PDF is internally a vector based format, why not render my
diagrams using a vector based image file format? After paying some extra money
to upgrade to Omnigraffle Pro, I was able to use the “File -&gt; Export” command:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2012/11/27/file-export.png"/>

… and then select the “SVG vector drawing” file type (the standard version of
Omnigraffle doesn’t support this):

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2012/11/27/file-type.png"/>

Now the real magic happens: when I include an SVG image in my HTML using a
standard &lt;img&gt; tag, PrinceXML generates a PDF file that includes the vector
commands to render the diagram! In fact, I also noticed that PrinceXML includes
whatever font I used in the Omnigraffle diagram right inside the PDF file:

<pre type="console">
prince: loading image: builds/pdf/assets/images/ch01/process.svg
prince: used font: Menlo, Bold
prince: used font: Menlo, Regular
</pre>

Here’s what same diagram looks like in the final version of [Ruby Under a
Microscope](http://patshaughnessy.net/ruby-under-a-microscope):

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2012/11/27/correct-text.png"/>

The reason this looks better is that the end user PDF viewer app, Apple Preview,
Adobe Reader, iBooks or whatever software your reader has, draws the diagram
text at the proper size at the moment the reader opens the page, using the font
that PrinceXML embedded into the PDF file.

## EPUB tip: package many small HTML files, not one large one

While writing [Ruby Under a
Microscope](http://patshaughnessy.net/ruby-under-a-microscope) I also became
familiar with the EPUB file format. It’s a useful file format because it’s
become an open standard shared by a large number of eBook reader devices. You
can read EPUBs on a high end device like an iPad, on a variety of Android
tablets, and also on cheaper eBook readers.

An EPUB file is really just a ZIP file that contains a HTML/CSS web site, along
with a few confusing, bizarre XML files. In fact, in hindsight I’ve realized
that an EPUB file closely resembles a J2EE web application - but without the
Java! You might remember J2EE from the early 2000s and 1990s - it was how we
created web sites before Rails came along in 2004 and made all our lives
easier.

Unzipping my EPUB file, here’s what you’ll see:

<pre type="console">
$ unzip ruby-under-a-microscope.epub 
Archive:  ruby-under-a-microscope.epub
 extracting: mimetype                
  inflating: META-INF/container.xml  
  inflating: OEBPS/assets/css/page-template.xpgt  
  inflating: OEBPS/assets/css/stylesheet.epub.css  
  inflating: OEBPS/assets/images/canvas-ana.png  
  inflating: OEBPS/assets/images/ch01/ast-compile1.png  
  inflating: OEBPS/assets/images/ch01/ast-compile2.png  
  inflating: OEBPS/assets/images/ch01/ast-compile3.png  
  inflating: OEBPS/assets/images/ch01/ast1.png  

… etc …

  inflating: OEBPS/ch04-part6.html   
  inflating: OEBPS/ch05-part1.html   
  inflating: OEBPS/ch05-part2.html   
  inflating: OEBPS/ch05-part3.html   
  inflating: OEBPS/ch05-part4.html   
  inflating: OEBPS/ch05-part5.html   
  inflating: OEBPS/ch05-part6.html   
  inflating: OEBPS/conclusion.html   
  inflating: OEBPS/content.opf       
  inflating: OEBPS/cover.html        
  inflating: OEBPS/preface.html      
  inflating: OEBPS/title.html        
  inflating: OEBPS/toc.html          
  inflating: OEBPS/toc.ncx          
</pre>

It really does look like a committee of Java programmers designed the EPUB
spec! We have something called “META-INF/container.xml,” a directory called
“OEBPS,” and there are lots of confusing XML files with names like content.opf
and toc.ncx. These all need to contain the proper information in precisely the
correct format. Fortunately, as I mentioned above, the Bookshop gem runs the
[EpubCheck](http://code.google.com/p/epubcheck/) tool to validate that all the
information in these files is correct.

On of the drawbacks of the Bookshop gem was that I had to write some Ruby code
myself to generate the table of contents information stored in the “toc.ncx”
file, and also the list of HTML and image files contained in the “content.opf”
file. In hindsight the Kitabu gem might have taken care of this detail for me.
Ideally the TOC info should be autogenerated from the &lt;h1&gt; or &lt;h2&gt;
tags I use in my text.

One other important detail here: you’ll notice my HTML content is split up into
a series of different HTML files: “ch04-part6,” “ch05-part1,” etc. Originally
Bookshop created a single, large HTML file containing the entire text of the
book and included that in the EPUB file. However, then [I heard from Avdi
Grimm](https://twitter.com/avdi/status/266323794812080128) and other readers
than it was slow on some EPUB reader devices. The problem was that the reader
device would hang while opening up the large HTML file, trying to render 100s
of pages all at once.

With some help from [Mike Cook](https://twitter.com/mcouk) I was able to fix
this by splitting my text up into smaller HTML files. I did this by further
customizing Bookshop, but I suspect Kitabu or other tools out there can do this
automatically for you.

## MOBI tip: use relative font sizes and Amazon CSS media types

Finally, to produce a book you can read on all of the different Kindle devices,
the most popular eBook reader in the U.S., you need to create a MOBI file.
Ironically, the MOBI format wasn’t even invented by Amazon, but now Amazon is
the only reason this format continues to be relevant. As I explained above,
Bookshop does this by running the [KindleGen
utility](http://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.html?ie=UTF8&docId=1000765211), from
Amazon. I’ve heard rumors Amazon might directly support EPUB in the future,
which would make all of our lives easier.

Be sure to download and use the [Kindle
Previewer](http://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.html?ie=UTF8&docId=1000765261) app.
This allows you to see how your MOBI file will render on seven or more
different varieties of the Kindle. eBooks appear somewhat differently on each
version of the Kindle and without this app there’s no way to know what will
happen.

Using the Kindle Previewer with [Ruby Under a
Microscope](http://patshaughnessy.net/ruby-under-a-microscope) I ran into
trouble rendering fonts on some versions of the Kindle. Newer versions of
Kindle, like the Kindle Fire, worked well, while older Kindles had trouble when
I used certain fonts. More trial and error revealed that I could use only
relative font sizes in my CSS code: <span class="code">font-size: 50%</span>
instead of <span class="code">font-size: 10pt</span>, for example. I was also
able to distinguish between newer and older Kindles using this special CSS
media type directive invented by Amazon:

<pre type="css">
@media  amzn-mobi
{

.section-caption {
  text-align: left;
  font-style: italic;
  font-size: 50%;
}

}

@media  amzn-kf8
{

.section-caption {
  text-align: center;
  font-style: italic;
  font-size: 75%;
}

}
</pre>

## Why go to all this trouble?

If you made it this far, then you must really be interested in self-publishing.
I have to admit that the technical work involved with producing an eBook myself
was far more tedious and difficult than I had ever thought it would be. I can
imagine that partnering with a publishing company would make this all a lot
easier - probably you would be able to work within an established, proven
technical publishing pipeline. But one of the joys of self-publishing is being
able to have full control over the final product. There’s something thrilling
and fun about controlling every last detail yourself. I hope this post saves
you a few hours of frustration when it comes time to produce your eBook, or
that it provides you a bit of encouragement to take the first step!


