title: "Ruby MRI Source Code Idioms #3: Embedded Objects"
date: 2013/2/8
tag: MRI Idioms

[Last year I wrote a
post](http://patshaughnessy.net/2012/1/4/never-create-ruby-strings-longer-than-23-characters)
about how the core team optimized Ruby to process shorter strings faster than
longer strings. I found that Ruby strings containing 23 or fewer
characters are much faster. Why am I bringing this up again now? Well, it
turns out this isn’t a single optimization that the core team has added for
short strings. Instead, they’ve used the same technique in many other places as
well. For example, if you create an array with only one, two or three elements,
it’s much faster than if you create an array with four or more elements:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/array-chart.png"/>

Or if you create a Struct object, it’s much faster when there are three or
fewer attributes:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/struct-setup.png"/>
<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/struct-chart.png"/>

The same pattern also appears if you create large integer values using the
Bignum class:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/bignum-chart.png"/>

Even your own Ruby objects are faster if they contain three or fewer
instance variables:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/ivars.png"/>

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/object-chart.png"/>

Finally, here’s the data showing the same optimization for Ruby strings that I
wrote about last year - you can see strings containing 23 or fewer characters
are faster:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/string-chart.png"/>

So should you stop and refactor all of your code to use small arrays, short
strings, and objects with fewer than four instance variables? Of course not!
That’s obviously ridiculous.

Also, I’ve exaggerated the performance difference by running these lines of
code in a tight loop, executing the same line of code over and over again. In a
more realistic Ruby program the speedup produced by using shorter strings or
small arrays would be mixed in with many other types of operations and code.
The speed of most Ruby applications has more to do with database connections,
network latency and other factors. And, of course, if you’re developing a Rails
web site - or more generally using lots of different gems - then your own Ruby
code is probably a small fraction of the Ruby code used across your entire
application. Bizarre refactoring to use fewer instance variables wouldn’t help
you much anyway.

Instead, the reason I’m bringing these optimizations to your attention is:

* ...to give you a small taste of all the hard work the Ruby core team has done
to speed up your code. The core team has put in countless hours of work to
squeeze every bit of performance out of Ruby they could to make your code
run faster. To make these optimizations work they had to add
many lines of complex, additional C code inside of Ruby.

* ...to make it easier for you to follow the C source code inside of Ruby. If
you’re interested in learning how your language actually works internally then
you’ll need to understand the coding patterns behind these optimizations.

* ...because it’s fun to see how these things actually work!

## A verbose optimization

There are many places within Ruby’s C source code where small objects - the
objects corresponding to the shorter bars in the charts above - are handled
differently than larger objects. This is such a common pattern that I consider
it an _MRI idiom_. In order to understand how many of the built in functions in
the <span class="code">String</span>, <span class="code">Array</span>, <span
  class="code">Struct</span>, or <span class="code">Bignum</span> classes work
you need to understand the coding pattern behind this optimization. And, as we
saw above, Ruby also uses this pattern when handling instance variables in your
own classes.

I call these smaller, faster objects “Embedded Objects,” based on the name of
certain C constants used inside of Ruby. For example, here’s the C code that
Ruby uses to create a new array of a certain size or “capacity:”

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/ary_new.png"/>

As you can see arrays longer than <span class="code">RARRAY_EMBED_LEN_MAX</span> are handled
differently than shorter arrays. What’s the value of <span class="code">RARRAY_EMBED_LEN_MAX</span>? It
turns out it is 3. This explains the behavior in the chart above.

Here’s another example - whenever you increase the size of a string, for
example by calling <span class="code">String#<<</span> or <span
  class="code">String#insert</span>, Ruby uses this code:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/rb_str_modify_expand.png"/>

Here again, we can see Ruby handles longer strings differently than shorter
strings, using the value <span class="code">RSTRING_EMBED_LEN_MAX.</span> What
is this set to? Well, from the performance chart above we know it must be 23.

Finally, here’s the code Ruby uses to create new <span
  class="code">Struct</span> objects:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/struct_alloc.png"/>

Once again you can see structs with fewer than <span
  class="code">RSTRUCT_EMBED_LEN_MAX</span> members are handled differently
than structs with more attributes. What’s the value of <span
  class="code">RSTRUCT_EMBED_LEN_MAX?</span> It must be 3, based on the chart
above.

These are just three simple examples; if you go and look you’ll find that these
“EMBED” constants appear in many places inside Ruby’s implementation of these 4
built-in classes, along with the code that handles instance variables in your
objects. Each time one of these constants appears, there will also be code the
Ruby core team had to write to handle embedded objects differently - to make
your code run a few microseconds faster!

To summarize, here are the 5 C constants Ruby uses as a threshold for embedded
objects, and their values:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/defines.png"/>

You can find these values in the include/ruby/ruby.h file. As you can see,
each of these corresponds to one of the performance pattern you see in the
charts above. For the Bignum class, Ruby uses the <span
  class="code">RBIGNUM_EMBED_LEN_MAX</span> value to keep track of how many
<span class="code">BDIGIT</span> structures will fit into a single <span
  class="code">RBignum</span> structure.  Ruby uses these <span
  class="code">BDIGIT</span> structures to hold large integer values, and
allocates more of them as necessary to represent very large integers.

## The C “union” keyword

Above I showed a few places where these “EMBED” constants appear in Ruby’s
source code, but the most important places the constant appears is in the C
structure definitions for these object types. For example, [as I explained two
weeks
ago](http://patshaughnessy.net/2013/1/23/ruby-mri-source-code-idioms-1-accessing-data-via-macros),
Ruby represents every array object using the <span class="code">RArray</span>
structure:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/union.png"/>

Here I’ve shown the <span class="code">RArray</span> struct separated into two
pieces: the top rectangle shows how larger arrays with 4 or more elements save
their data, and the lower rectangle shows how shorter array with three or fewer
elements work.  The key to this is the <span class="code">union</span> keyword,
which is a trick you can use in the C language to indicate the same memory
segment can be used in more than one way:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/rarray-memory.png"/>

By using the <span class="code">union</span> keyword, the C compiler allows you
to access either the values on the top via the <span class="code">heap</span>
structure, the first member of the union, or the values on the bottom, inside
the <span class="code">ary</span> array, the second member of the union.

## Accessing embedded objects via macros

[As I also wrote about two weeks
ago](http://patshaughnessy.net/2013/1/23/ruby-mri-source-code-idioms-1-accessing-data-via-macros),
Ruby uses a series of C macros to access the data inside an array, string or
most other built in object types. The Ruby core team, fortunately, also uses
these macros to hide some of the complexity around embedded objects.

To see what I mean, here’s the definition of the <span
  class="code">RARRAY_PTR</span> macro  - Ruby uses this to get a pointer to an
array’s elements:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2013/2/8/rarray-ptr.png"/>

Every time Ruby needs access to the contents of an array, it runs the code
found inside this macro: First, it uses a second macro, <span
  class="code">RBASIC</span>, to get access to some internal flags stored
inside the inner <span class="code">RBasic</span> structure. One of these flags
is called <span class="code">RARRAY_EMBED_FLAG</span>. If <span
  class="code">RARRAY_EMBED_FLAG</span> is set, then Ruby knows this array is
an embedded object, and therefore looks for the array’s elements in <span
  class="code">as.ary</span> - or the array located right inside the <span
  class="code">RArray</span> struct. If <span
  class="code">RARRAY_EMBED_FLAG</span> is not set, then Ruby looks for the
array’s elements in the usual way by following the <span class="code">ptr</span> pointer to another
memory block in the heap.

## Learn the idiom once and use it many times

As I said above, by learning just a few coding patterns, you can quickly start
to understand large parts of Ruby’s internal source code. Since the embedded
object pattern is used by five different types of objects, it makes a lot of
sense to spend some time learning how it works. By learning a few more MRI
idioms, you’ll start to think like a member of the Ruby core team! Stay tuned,
next time we’ll look at another common coding pattern used by Matz and his
colleagues...
