title: "What Do Perl and Go Have in Common?"
date: 2015/9/25

**TL/DR:** _Both Perl and Go only partially implement object oriented
programming, in a confusing way. Using either language you can create
structures equivalent to objects but without using keywords such as <span
class="code">class</span> or <span class="code">new</span>.  Converting a Go
function into a method by adding a receiver reminds me of "blessing" a Perl hash
reference._

It’s hard to imagine two programming languages that are more different. Larry
Wall created Perl  almost 30 years ago in 1987. Google introduced Go much more
recently in 2009. Perl is a dynamic, interpreted language while Go uses a
compiler and static types. Perl syntax is quirky, fun and sometimes bizarre,
while Go syntax is clean and simple, almost boring at times.

This year, coincidentally, I tried to learn both Perl and Go around the same
time. Oddly, I found something in common between these two dramatically
different languages. They both allow you to create objects and to write
methods, but without supporting <span class="code">class</span>, <span
class="code">new</span> or other keywords found in traditional object oriented
languages like Smalltalk, Java, Ruby or Python.  Both languages leave the door
partially open to object oriented design, but don’t provide the syntax or
features you expect and need for using objects and classes.

## Writing a Perl Function

Let’s suppose I want to calculate the density of Jupiter, based on its mass and
diameter. Using Perl, I could write:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/perl1.png"/>

<div style="float: right; padding: 25px 8px 0px 30px; text-align: center;">
  <img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/vw.jpg"><br/>
  <i>
  Writing Perl feels like riding a vintage VW bus. Things don’t<br/>
  work the way you expect, but you can always feel the love.
</i>
</div>

As you can see, Perl’s syntax is somewhat odd: The <span class="code">my</span>
keyword indicates each variable belongs to the local lexical scope. The <span
class="code">shift</span> keywords pull the mass and radius values from an
array of values Perl implicitly passes to every function - Perl functions
always take a single array argument! And you have to prefix all of the
identifiers with either a <span class="code">$,</span> <span
class="code">@</span> or <span class="code">%</span> character to indicate
whether it is a scalar (simple value), an array or a hash. Sometimes in more
complex Perl code you have to combine these prefixes together in cryptic
patterns, such as <span class="code">@$var</span>, or <span
class="code">%$var</span>. Thankfully in this simple function I just use
numeric values, so <span class="code">$</span> is sufficient.

To me, Perl feels like an old-fashioned, awkward version of Ruby. And this
makes some sense. Perl was to some extent the model for both Ruby and Python,
which were created just a few years after Perl in the early 1990s. Ruby and
Python smoothed out the rough edges of Perl’s syntax (along with adding proper
support for objects among other things).

## Creating a Perl Object

Now I decide to use an object oriented style instead. I want a Jupiter object
which has mass and radius attributes, and I’d like the density function to be a
method, like this:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/perl2.png"/>

In other words, I’d like to think of <span class="code">$jupiter</span> as an
instance of the Planet class.

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/jupiter-class.png"/>

By writing a <span class="code">Planet</span> class, I group together data
values that describe each planet (mass and radius) with the functions that use
those values (density).  Object oriented languages refer to the data values as
_instance variables_, and the functions as _methods_. By creating a class, I now
have a natural place to gather functions and attributes related to planets.

The problem is that Perl isn’t an object oriented language. There’s no way to
declare a class, define methods or create objects which are instances of that
class. However, a few years after Perl was invented, in the mid 1990s, Larry
Wall and the Perl team introduced some support for object oriented programming
concepts in Perl 5. They converted Perl into an object oriented language after
the fact - at least a partially object oriented language.

To create a Perl class, I first group my planet functions together using the Perl <span class="code">package</span> keyword. In this example I have only one:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/perl3.png"/>

This gives me a place to put all of the methods of the <span
class="code">Planet</span> class - the <span class="code">package</span>
keyword plays the same role the <span class="code">class</span> keyword would
in Java or Ruby, to some extent. Also notice that I’ve rewritten my function to
use object oriented syntax.  Instead of obtaining the mass and radius from the
parameters array, I get a single parameter which I call <span
class="code">$self</span>. Then I use <span class="code">$self</span> as a hash
reference to get the mass and radius values, for example: <span
class="code">$self->{'mass'}</span>. This is object oriented code. I’ve created
a class and added a method to it.

However, let’s think about this for another moment:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/words1.png"/>

Notice there’s a difference between what I want to say, and the words I have to
use to say it. The Perl language doesn’t include the <span
class="code">class</span> keyword; instead, I need to use <span
class="code">package</span>. We’ll see this again in a moment.

To create an instance of my new <span class="code">Planet</span> class, an
object, I need to create a hash (technically a reference to a hash) and then
“bless” it:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/perl4.png"/>


This creates a connection between the hash (the object) and the package that
contains the methods I want to use (the class). Now I can use syntax such as
<span class="code">$jupiter->density()</span>. I’ve done it! I’ve created an object using Perl.

However, once again the language doesn’t supply the words I want to use to
express the idea I’m thinking of:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/words2.png"/>

## Expressing Object Oriented Concepts Using Perl

Here’s the complete, object oriented version of my example:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/perl5.png"/>

To me, the Perl code I wrote above seems very confusing. But it’s not Perl’s
strange, old-fashioned syntax that confuses me. After a while, all the <span
class="code">$</span> symbols and the use of <span class="code">shift</span>
start to make sense. Writing Perl code is a bit like writing Ruby code while on
drugs - I start with Ruby and just keep adding <span class="code">$</span> and
semicolon characters until it works.

The real problem in this example is that Perl allows me to create objects and
classes, but doesn’t refer to them as objects or classes. Instead, I have
“blessed references” and “packages.” Perl allows me to get the object oriented
behavior I want, but doesn’t let me use the words I want to use to describe
what I’m doing. Perl’s partial support of object oriented programming is
confusing at best.

_Note: Perl 6, under development for the last fifteen years and still not
released, is planning to introduce more explicit support for objects using the
<span class="code">class</span> and <span class="code">new</span> keywords._

<div style="float: right; padding: 25px 8px 0px 30px; text-align: center;">
  <img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/driverless-car.png"><br/>
  <i>
Writing Go code feels like riding in a Google driverless car:<br/>
the compiler and <span class="code">gofmt</span> tool are in complete control.
  </i>
</div>

## Creating a Go Object

Perl was invented many years ago. Now let’s try using a modern, new programming
language to write the same example: Go. Along the way I’ll compare the Go
version with the Perl code I wrote above.

Earlier using Perl I had to use the <span class="code">package</span> keyword
to define a place to put my class’s methods. In Go, I define a group of
methods in a different way: by associating them with a type. Therefore, I’ll
start my Go code by creating a <span class="code">Planet</span> type:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/go1.png"/>

The two versions look very different. In Go I define a static type that always
consists of mass and radius values, while in Perl I dynamically create a hash
that might contain any values. 

Once again, however, I’m forced to think about my code one way and write it
another:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/words3.png"/>

What Go and Perl really have in common is this: Neither language contains the
words and syntax I really would like to use to express the object oriented
concepts I’m trying to use.

So far I’ve created a type, a static collection of values. Let’s take the next
step and convert that into a class:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/go2.png"/>

In Go I don’t need to connect my instance data with the class; the mass and
radius values are already contained inside the <span class="code">Planet</span>
struct type. Instead, I need to create a connection between the method and the
class. I do this by typing in a receiver for the Density function, <span
class="code">func (p Planet) Density()</span>, converting it into a method of
the Planet type.

In Perl I “bless” a hash by connecting it to a group of functions in a package.
A blessed hash is an object in Perl. In Go I “bless” a function by connecting
it to a type containing instance data. A blessed function combined with a type
is a class in Go. The two languages both use special syntax tricks to allow for
object oriented programming, but they make the connection between instance
variables and methods from opposite directions. 

Once again, however, there’s an impedance mismatch between the concepts I’m
imagining and the words I have to use to to express them:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/words4.png"/>


Go doesn’t provide me with the vocabulary I want to use. I want to type <span
class="code">class</span>, but Go only allows me to use <span class="code">type
struct</span>. And because there’s no <span class="code">class</span> keyword,
my blessed function, my method, could be anywhere and not necessary right next
to my type definition.

## Expressing Object Oriented Concepts Using Go

Here’s the complete, object oriented version of my example in Go:

<img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/go3.png"/>

I find this Go code just as confusing and misleading as the Perl version above,
and for the same reason. Both Perl and Go take the first step towards object
oriented programming, but stop short of providing a complete solution. Instead
of objects, Go gives us C-style static structures which can have methods
associated with them. And Go doesn’t provide classes at all: There’s no natural
place to gather all of the methods belonging to a given type.

We can guess that Perl 5 didn’t introduce proper support for object oriented
programming either because it was too difficult to add it to an existing
language, or for backward compatibility reasons. But the [designers of Go
decided from the very
beginning](http://commandcenter.blogspot.com/2012/06/less-is-exponentially-more.html)
not to support classes or objects. Then, why support methods at all? Why allow
developers to create object-like structures, but with a confusing syntax? Or
why not go all the way and introduce the <span class="code">class</span>
keyword to properly support object structures?

<div style="float: right; padding: 25px 8px 0px 30px; text-align: center;">
  <img src="http://patshaughnessy.net/assets/2015/9/25/jupiter.jpg"><br/>
  <i>
The density of Jupiter is 1,326 kg/m<sup>3</sup>, only <br/>
1/4th the density of Earth. (source: <a
href="http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/jupiterfact.html">NASA</a>).
</i>
</div>

Go’s tepid, partial support for object oriented programming reminds me of Perl.
Writing a Go function and making it special - “blessing” it - by assigning it a
receiver reminds me of how I would bless a hash in a Perl program. Perhaps
Google used Perl as design inspiration for Go; perhaps they wanted to include a
small bit of Perl’s quirky, bizarre but lovable behavior in Go.

Regardless, don’t stretch your programming language by using it in ways it
wasn’t intended to be used. And certainly don’t change your ideas and solutions
to fit any given programming language. Choose the programming language that has
keywords and syntax that allow you to express your ideas in a natural,
straightforward manner. The only purpose of a language, whether a human
language or programming language, is to express our abstract thoughts using
words in simple, or even beautiful, ways.





















